a lot of people feel rejected
by the culture they grew up in
and i think there's less discourse
about the decision to reject
the culture you grew up in not that i
feel
rejected by it but that i consciously
and intentionally choose to reject it
there's not a lot of discourse about
that um when you talk about someone who
grows up
muslim deciding not just to reject
the islamic faith become atheist or
become buddhist to become something else
but to really challenge and reject the
cultural assumptions
they grew up with there's not a lot of
discourse about that
if you say talk to someone who grew up
in maybe a very loving
warm and supportive jamaican immigrant
family
but they really at some point started to
question jamaican culture and say
do i want to be a part of this is this
how i want to live my life
i grew up around a lot of jamaicans and
jamaican immigrants in
in toronto and you know some of them
chose to really remain a part of
jamaican culture
and some of them took another road
remember i met and spoke to one jamaican
guy who uh
was working very hard to learn chinese
and he was devoting his life to foreign
policy relations in jamaica and china
he really aspired to make jamaican
culture more like chinese culture there
were a lot of things he respected about
chinese culture
so it wasn't white western european
culture
that he idealized by contrast to the
culture he grew up in
but you know it's just as difficult if
you're talking about
scotland or white english speaking
canada
or or any culture it seems like in the
21st century in 2018
we're very eager to make a hero
out of someone who for example grows up
transgender and who feels
that their culture rejects them and we
don't
maybe examine the extent to which they
may be
consciously and assertively engaged in a
critique of a rejection of
their own culture and the same goes for
me and the same goes for
so many of my my colleagues and
contemporaries
now i've started this out on uh i don't
know
a thoroughly grave and serious sounding
you know tone but um
there's a sense in which i think
progress in this area
largely belongs to stand-up comedy when
i grew up
there was a i don't know rich
politically correct
discourse about
cultural relativism trying to teach
people
to regard all cultures as equal and
interchangeable
and the real voice i had to contrast
that to
was stand-up comedy people like chris
rock
people who were examining and
contrasting cultures
and whether the differences were small
and subtle
or deep and profound really drawing
attention to what those contrasts were
and why and how they mattered and of
those two movements
we've talked about cultural relativism
or
just the the mean streak
of keeping it real being self-critical
and critical of others that you see
ongoing and stand-up comedy um
i'd say there's no doubt that the
tendency you see in stand-up comedy
has proved to be more aesthetically
durable and more meaningful for all of
us
there are two things that really spur me
to make this video
at this moment this is the same day when
in france
after about one month in france with my
daughter i've just handed my daughter
back to her grandmother
now me and my girlfriend get on with our
lives alone my period of custody my
daughter has ended
um you know one of the things just the
realization this has been kind of an
important issue
bubbling away in the background of a lot
of my videos
whether my videos were talking about
doing humanitarian work in southeast
asia
research into buddhism uh research into
indigenous minority languages like
creating ojibwe or what have you
all the different decisions i made in my
life the different attempts i made to
make the world a better place
or to make myself a better person by
learning different things and
pursuing different forms of activism
bubbling away in the background
is the question you know isil to what
extent
do you really just hate and reject the
culture that you happen to be born into
in the same sense that millions of
people are born muslim
or born into islamic countries not just
again not just the religion but
culturally muslim countries
and and they have no no choice no matter
i had no choice
where i was born but what family i was i
was raised and so on
but i had a choice about what i was
going to do about it how it was going to
educate myself
as soon as the questions of my education
you know
fell into fell into my own hands and um
just a couple of days i met and spoke
with a friend of mine i think i can call
her a friend
and not for the first time we met up and
she was saying to me
not for the first time that she she
completely adores
the culture of italy she loves living in
italy she considers italy the greatest
place to live in the world
and she was born and raised in italy
she's someone who really
actively eagerly and passionately
conforms to
the culture that she happened to be to
be pointed to
um and by contrast you know
talking to my mother again now my mother
and i were not on speaking terms for
many years
i think we put it to about 15 years i
don't want to count exactly on years
we didn't talk for a long time but i can
remember when i was a kid
my mother really looked up to french
culture
really valued france as a modern nation
and historically as a culture she she
lionized or idealized french culture to
some extent
and i see her today and she doesn't just
dislike french culture she isn't just a
critic of french culture
i think it's fair to say that she she
hates french culture
if we're going to be honest about how we
feel and how we think about culture and
how we live in a culture
it's never going to be possible to live
by the
relativistic myth that all cultures are
are equal um it's impossible
for us to sit down and have an
intelligent and honest conversation
about cambodian culture and lotion
culture
and pretend that there aren't really
serious deep differences
that differentiate cambodia from laos
that differentiate
cambodia from china um
but you need to have a certain kind of
sensitivity detachment and insight
to even get to the level of being a
stand-up comedian who can really speak
in an
earnest and engaging and meaningful way
about what those differences are
what they matter how they shape our
lives what we perceive and what we fail
to perceive
um my feelings about canadian culture
now
as a middle-aged person with all this
experience of having lived in and worked
in
so many different cultures having a
sense about what life is like him
cambodia laos long list of other places
i mean just this month you know living
in france
there are things i can appreciate about
white english-speaking canadian culture
but you know um i i think the main
negative impact on people's lives of
white
english-speaking canadian culture is
just that
everyone lives alone
in canada you can put so much effort
into i don't know building up or
creating a relationship with someone
maybe it's someone you meet you know at
a cocktail party let's say a party where
people are standing around in
and talking at length uh maybe it's
something more like a conference
for me it's often at the university
campus you really put in
a bunch of hours to talking about what
are your research interests what's your
work what are you doing what am i doing
you talk this through and
you might as well have taken that time
and effort and just flushed it down the
toilet
and sooner or later even if people
aren't consciously examining this
people stop making the effort and they
instead take that
time and put it into video games or
mountain climbing or playing ice hockey
or watching
football and television they will do
something with their time
other than learning from other human
beings face to face
and challenging themselves to learn from
other people
and you know it's a very fundamental
part of the human experience
that i feel white english-speaking
canadians are lacking
we live in a kind of doleful isolation
a kind of invidious silence there are
barriers that separate us and those
barriers are built up by many factors by
fear
but above all else by this cumulative
disappointment
that you put in the effort to establish
some kind of rapport or mutual respect
or cooperation
and nothing comes from it and by
contrast earlier today these are
really all examples from today or just
the last couple weeks but today
i sent emails to a number of chinese
people
and one of them i only met face to face
once maybe 10 years ago
but we stayed in contact by email after
that
uh you know and just now i was writing
to him again he's given me useful advice
at many points
he's gotten in contact with other people
on my behalf and introduced me to them
and then i met them and useful things
came from that
i mean several different chinese people
i mean obviously i didn't meet them all
10 years ago so about 10 years ago
some of that five years ago and
there's so much benefit mutual benefit
there's so much exchange of information
and experience and cooperation
there's so much positivity that comes
out of
networking and interface and
communication and collaboration
with chinese colleagues that i
absolutely
do not get with white english-speaking
canadians
the french culture is very different i
was just recently talking to my mother
about what she hates about french
culture given that recently she adored
it
and you know i can say though french
culture
two nights in a row my girlfriend and i
went to the beach
with my daughter and my daughter went
out and played and two nights in a row
different french people on the same
beach
invited us to sit down with them and
talk with them in one case they offered
us a bottle of wine
uh you know to sit down and basically
make friends you know
and um in the other case we exchanged
emails and what have you
really you know with with there there be
no such basis for this connection that i
have when i go to an academic conference
or an event at the university when i
meet people
where it's really clear we have common
work interests research interest
and so on and i really pointed out to
melissa look look how different this is
from the situation we're in right now in
victoria
bc canada in vancouver canada
in these in these places again how hard
it is to get over that
that first barrier of of isolation
um now i just want to say
i don't think that sociability
exists as an end in itself i don't think
that people socialize
just in order to socialize and for no
other purpose
i think it's crucially important for the
vast majority of human beings
to be confronted with the alienness of
their fellow man
again and again and again so that we
question
what do i really know how do i know that
how did i learn that how did i become
convinced of that myself
how can i convince others of my beliefs
and this is something much more simple
and fundamental than
than socratic method but questioning
oneself
questioning others i mean
it's very sad when for example you meet
communists
who their whole lives have only spoken
with other communists
it's very sad when you meet libertarians
who've only spoken with libertarians
and they don't have that that human
experience
um but to some extent i really feel the
sickness
of white english speaking canada is much
more generalized
it's it's an isolation
of all people from all other people of
all ideas from all other ideas
of every ideology no matter how air sats
and undefined
going unchallenged that after a very
early period
when white english speaking canadians
are forced
to socialize by being in the school
system by being assigned to a room
number in a class
by being told you're in room 2f
and therefore the this person sits next
to you and you're laughing this person
says
after that ends this period of enforced
sociability
i think that canadians go into a type of
a very dangerous intellectual and
emotional
isolation and maybe in the past
this was medicated with alcohol
and cigarettes and card games my
grandparents generation
sat around and played cards to an
unbelievable extent many many hours
before this type of past
cards bowling uh darts
and to some extent our current
generation i think
is medicating the problem through
marijuana
and video games and antidepressants
um distractions
some mind-altering and and some that are
not
but i say again i don't feel that
socializing
is important to make you feel good about
yourself
for you to be happy if anything what i'm
trying to suggest you here is the
opposite
what i think is so crucially lacking
in the the lives intellectual
uh emotional and otherwise what i think
is so crucial lacking the lives of
white english speaking canadians is the
business of being
challenged of being shaken in your
assumptions
your assumptions about yourself the
world you live in what you know
what you aspire to do your cosmology
what you think about the world your own
purpose in your life
um and i've got to tell you
illiterate people in laos
who i mean i knew one family and they
went from town to town
selling baskets hand woven baskets and
their other business their involvement
was shoes
they went from village to village to
some extent they were illiterate to some
extent they were alert they're not not
people who read
but you know um i met all kinds of
characters in in third world countries
like laos and cambodia
i met all kinds of characters who were
living in a much more stimulated
and stimulating
mode than the depressed
isolated fatuous self-deceiving mode
that i see my fellow my fellow canadians
living in
and it's uh it's a way of life that i
feel my own friends and colleagues the
people i went to school with
people went to high school it's a mode
of living i feel that nobody has
chosen but those of us
who rebel against it have
consciously chosen to opt out of it
in the same sense that i had to choose
sobriety
that chose to reject alcohol that i
chose to reject eating mead
thus to become vegan um
in the sense that i had to consciously
reject
all of the excuses for a life of
conformism and mediocrity
that were built into my my culture um
those who step out of this are
definitely choosing something
but i think the tragedy
you know that i see written in fine
print on the faces of my
my fellow white canadians is precisely
that they didn't
choose this and
they don't embrace a culture
and they don't in their own minds engage
in either
a critique of that culture or any kind
of
active appreciation for a culture and
even the way that my italian friend does
when she can sit there and really
explain to me
why it is she loves life in italy in
contrast to germany
france china other countries
around the world that she's lived in
i'm going to close this video by saying
i chose to be an optimist about human
nature
i chose to judge people not by their
past actions
but by their potential to do good in the
future
and by that standard i can still look at
white english speaking canada
and say they have the potential to do
something good
but by the other standard judging a
culture by its
past actions judging a person or people
by their past actions
it's inescapable the sense in which all
of canada
is is marked by the stain of genocide
by the history of colonialism and let's
face it folks
we didn't build the pyramids we didn't
accomplish something great or wonderful
and impressive
there's not a lot in the other side of
the scale of that balance
the history of this country in that
sense
if you're going to judge it by its past
actions and not by its potential to do
something positive in the future
i i don't see how any thinking
feeling person who takes themselves
seriously
could fail to judge a country like
canada
a country like australia a country built
on this
this kind of genocide very differently
from a country like switzerland which
certainly has its own violent history
especially of wars between uh different
forms of christianity and what have you
but fundamentally switzerland remains a
multi-ethnic
multilingual democracy
and canada is instead a colonialist
multicultural
um built on top of the history of
genocide
that we in our doleful isolation
in my generation have utterly failed to
deal with
democratically or otherwise